Clinical Trials: Scientific exp used to evaluate the safety and efficacy of one or more treatments

4 phases:
1) Short-term | Small healthy group of patients
2) Dose-finding - Identify which dose is the best | Small group of partients with disease
3) Full-scale Evaluation | Most important phase, using the selected dose | Larger pool of diseased patients
4) Post-marketing | Drug in commerce | Identification of any long-term and rare side effects

Confounders notion - Randomized Controls - Single & Double-Blinded study (help reducing bias)

Type of Endpoints: endopoints are clinical measures related to the safety &/or efficacy
- are prioritized into primary and secondary endp.
- Composite Endpoints (combine multi outcomes, then summarize these endp. as categorical)
- Continous (mean, median, ..)
- Categorical (based on a binary outocome for ex.)
- Survival ( Event/censored)
- Count (Non-norm distr., discrete values)

Statistical Analysis:
Inference / 
Hypothesis Testing (estimate treatment effect, e.g. difference in means; IC: Test Statistics)
on Continous (Norm-distr): we can test whether the means are equal using a two-sample t-test

on Continous (NON-Norm distr): use Wilcoxon Rank Su Test

On Binary: comparison of proportions using Chi-S test of independence (or Fisher's Exact Test on small sample sizes)

Randomization Methods:
After patients screened (and meet inclusion criteria), we randomized them (in equal prop) into:
"Active Drug" group and "Placebo" (control) group.
We can have a single of double blinded study.
- Simple random (using `sample' function of R. Disadv: for small studies  we can have unequal distrib/number of patiens in the groups
- Random Permuted Blocks (blockrand package of R. using a block size as a multiple of the # of treatment groups and for each block we have balanced number)
                          Disadv: the treatm. assignment becomes predictable at the end of each block. Btw, we can avoid this allowing the block sizes to be random
                          
- Stratified Randomiz. (Disadv: balance patients may be not reach for small sample)

Crossover, Factorial and Cluster Rand Trials:
Crossover: Participants-->Random--> split into A and B groups for a period1, then washout so that A patiens will be in group B and viceversa in the nxt Period2
           Adv: being able to have within-patient comparisons; eliminating between-pat variability; increase the precision of the treatment
           Disadv: limited to a number of setting such as chronic/stable condition; can only eval short-term effects; carryover effects (or a drug effect that was not fully eliminated during the washout period)
           
Factorial: Allows the comparions of 2 or more treatments against the control (within the same trial)
           Calculate Odds of recovery within each group + Odds Ratio
           
           
Cluster: groups are randomized to the interventions (so type of clusters are: schools, hospitals, communities..)

Equivalence and non-Inferiority Trials:
Equiv T: demonstrate similar efficacy between 2 treats
         Test Hyp that the absolute difference is less/great than delta (specified)
         Two one-sided tests
         
         Example: The equivalence margin was 11%. A two-one sided test approach was used, which produced the below output.
         Under the new intervention, 69.7% experienced a relapse compared to 64.3% in the standard intervention. The difference is 5.4%, two-sided 90% CI (-1.3% to 12.2%).
         Which of the following is true? --> The two-sided 90% confidence interval includes plus or minus 11%, therefore, we cannot claim equivalence at the 5% significance level

Non-Infer T: demonstrate that one treat is NOT INFERIOR to another
             
Bioequivalnce Trials - def of Pharmacokinetics (+ADME)
        When 2 drug formulations have equivalent pharmak. profiles it is often assumed that this leads to equivalent EFFICACY and SAFETY effects
        (so a phase 3 study can be avoided)
        Assessing bioeq: mean (of T-test form) / mean (R-reference form)
        
Sample Size Adjustments on one-sided tests / Unequal group sizes / Loss to follow-up

Def/"items" on Interim Analyses and Stopping Rules
When to stop a trial early: Efficcy, Safety,Futulity or Other factors (cost ..)
Stopping rules: interim an. often require increased sample size
                multiple testing increases chance of a Type I error
                Stopp rules use p-val or test-statistics
                
Recap on Equiv Trials: demonstrate that 2 treats produce similar resp and a maximum acceptable difference (delta) specified
               How can we ESTIMATE the REQUIRED SAMPLE SIZE?:
                we should have: response rating in the existing drug (let's say 70%)
                                Fixed delta (5%)
                                Power (for ex 90%): we want to be 90% sure that the 2-sided 90% IC excludes +/- 5%
                                Two one-sided tests
                for continous outcomes:
                                delta: 3 units
                                pooled std: 15
                                Power: 80%
                                Two one-sided tests
                                ---> 80% sure that 2-sided 90% CI excludes delta +/- 3
                 for cluster rand trials:
                                delta: 1 unit (for ex: "one unit difference in BMI between the 2 interventions)
                                pooled std: 2.5
                                avg cluster size: 25
                                Intraclass corr coeff: 0.1
                                Power: 90%
                                
Regression Analysis: with the continous and nornally distributed endpoint of change from baseline Y we can execute
                     a simple linear reg to assess treatment effect.
                     
Various analysis methods: Intention-to-treat (ITT), Full Analysis Set(FAS), Subgroup Analysis, Interaction
                                 
